####################################
Hedge Funds: The Living and the Dead
####################################

Motivation(s)
=============

Several studies on hedge funds have tried to document survivorship bias, but
often draw conflicting conclusions due to the usage of different hedge fund
data.  The bias comes from the fact that data vendors collect only survived
funds, which can make the resulting analysis overstate a fund's performance.
Since hedge funds report information on a voluntary basis, minimizing bias may
require examining the dataset.

Proposed Solution(s)
====================

The author propose examining survivorship biases in hedge funds by comparing
different databases (e.g. TASS, HFR) under the lens of different investment
styles.  While the evaluation of survivorship bias is nothing new, this analysis
is trying to address the reliability of commercial hedge fund data.

Evaluation(s)
=============

The author examined the hedge fund data from TASS and HFR.  The average
survivorship bias is over 2% per year, which is consistent with existing
studies.  Contradicting reports of smaller bias is due to the relatively low
number of dissolved funds in the HFR/MAR database.  Note that the survivorship
biases are different across styles.  They are significant for 10 out of 15
styles in TASS but none is significant for HFR.  As exhibited in a fund's
declining returns toward the date of liquidation, the reason for its
disappearance is mainly poor performance.

Across the two databases, at least 5% of return numbers and 5% of NAV numbers
differ dramatically.  TASS has more return observations and NAV observations due
to including more funds and a longer return history than HFR.  The return
numbers in TASS are consistent with the NAV numbers.  TASS has more funds with
incentive fee and management fee information than HFR.  Mismatching between the
reported returns and the percentage changes in NAVs can partially explain the
difference.

The author promote the TASS data for doing hedge fund research because of its
relative completeness and accuracy.

Future Direction(s)
===================

- How would one construct models that are resilient to inaccurate data?
- How can unsupervised learning determine the data's accuracy?

Question(s)
===========

- How much would the switch from a probit regression to a logit regression
  change the underlying analysis?

Analysis
========

When computing any statistic over data, one should verify whether the data
should exhibit such characteristics before proceeding to a conclusion.  The
reason for conflicting survivorship biases was due to a lack of understanding of
the data.  Although a reasonable cause was identified, the author should have
quantified how much these biases influence other statistics.  At such a small
percentage, is it even worthwhile to filter out the data?  One interesting
point, which reinforces the practice of verifying the data, was that one
previous study claimed the small bias was due to onshore and offshore funds in
HFR despite the data showing otherwise.  The baseless use of probit regression
stands out the most in the analysis; perhaps it was selected out of conventional
practice in economics.

.. rubric:: References

.. bibliography:: refs.bib
   :all:
