###################################################################################
The Adaptive Markets Hypothesis: Market Efficiency from an Evolutionary Perspective
###################################################################################

Motivation(s)
=============

Efficient Markets Hypothesis (EMH) is one of the most enduring ideas of modern
finance.  EMH asserts that in an informationally efficient market, price changes
must be unforecastable if they fully incorporate the information and
expectations of all market participants.  The theory has been extended to
incorporate non-traded assets (e.g. transaction cost, human capital), but the
overall idea still revolves around prices, probabilities, and preferences:

- Individual investors form expectations rationally.
- Markets aggregate information efficiently.
- Equilibrium prices incorporate all available information.

The standard approach to modeling preferences is to assert that investors
optimize additive time-separable expected utility functions from certain
parametric families.  This has been criticized by psychologists and behavioral
economists for ignoring behavioral biases that are endemic in decision-making
under uncertainty (e.g. overconfidence, overreaction, loss aversion, herding,
psychological accounting, miscalibration of probabilities, hyperbolic
discounting, regret).  Furthermore, there needs to be some degree of market
inefficiency (e.g. noise traders); otherwise, there is no profit to gathering
and trading on information.

Proponents of EMH argue that there are limits to the degree and persistence of
behavioral biases, and arbitrageurs will take advantage of these opportunities
until they no longer exist (i.e. Dutch book); hence the market prices will
become rational again.  Their conclusion implicitly assumes rational beliefs are
not so pervasive as to overwhelm the capacity of arbitrage capital, however,
empirical results (e.g. LTCM) have illustrated contrarily.

More recently, economists and biologists have begun to explore the connections
between sociobiology and economics.  One of the more recognized idea was bounded
rationality and satisficing: individuals are bounded in their degree of
rationality and make choices that are merely satisfactory.  Unfortunately, this
idea was dismissed because it did not offer a way to determine the point at
which an individual stops optimizing and reaches a satisfactory solution.

Proposed Solution(s)
====================

The author proposes the Adaptive Markets Hypothesis (AMH), an extension of
bounded rationality and satisficing that includes evolutionary principles (e.g.
natural selection).  The AMH asserts that behavioral biases are actually
maladaptive suboptimal behaviors.  Individuals make choices based on past
experience and their best guess as to what might be optimal; they learn by
receiving positive or negative reinforcement from the outcomes in some
environment.  When the environment changes, the previously developed heuristics
may become unsuitable for survival.

Through the lens of evolutionary biology, many other aspects of economic
behavior (e.g. competition, cooperation, market-making behavior, general
equilibrium, disequilibrium dynamics) can be derived in a way that is consistent
with established neuroeconomics research.

Evaluation(s)
=============

This is a theoretical paper that uses a limited number of economics examples to
illustrate how evolutionary biology can be used to model investors.  The author
admits more solid evidence are needed in order to arrive at a quantitative
framework.

Future Direction(s)
===================

- What is an appropriate generative process to model trading firms (e.g. Goldman
  Sachs)?

Question(s)
===========

- Evolutionary principles are qualitative, so how would one transform it into
  a quantitative metric (e.g. Price equation)?

Analysis
========

The AMH is more reflective of how the market functions than EMH.  The theory's
usage of evolutionary principles nicely captures the market's arbitrariness.
Unfortunately, the author has not yet worked out a quantative framework that
one can apply immediately.  One of the more interesting points is how economists
easily dismiss a more natural description of decision making just to stay within
the norm.

.. rubric:: References

.. bibliography:: refs.bib
   :all:
