#############################################################
When are Contrarian Profits Due to Stock Market Overreaction?
#############################################################

Motivation(s)
=============

The classical definition of random walk is a process with independently and
identically distributed increments.  The economist's view of a random walk is a
process with uncorrelated but heterogeneously distributed dependent increments.
Even though empirical evidence has made apparent that historical stock prices
do not follow random walks, several studies still attribute forecastability to
the stock market overreaction hypothesis, the notion that investors are subject
to waves of optimism and pessimism and therefore create a kind of momentum that
causes prices to temporarily swing away from their fundamental values.  These
theories of overreaction imply price changes must be negatively autocorrelated
for some holding period.  When in the presence of negative serial correlation,
a contrarian portfolio strategy of selling the winners and buying the losers
should yield positive expected profits.  This causal relationship has been
widely accepted, yet no prior studies have questioned whether the profitability
of contrarian investment strategies necessarily implies stock market
overreaction.

Proposed Solution(s)
====================

The authors claim weekly contrarian portfolio returns are strongly positively
autocorrelated due to cross-autocorrelations despite negative autocorrelations
in individual stock returns.  Positive cross-autocovariances across securities
can be understood as a higher return for stock A today implies a higher return
for stock B tomorrow on average.  Each security's returns can even be
unforecastable using past returns of that security alone.  The empirical
findings show cross effects are generally positive in sign and have lead-lag
structure: the returns of large-capitalization stocks almost always lead those
of smaller stocks.  Since the empirical results show individual security returns
as generally weakly negatively autocorrelated, positive autocorrelation in
weekly returns indexes is completely attributable to cross effects.

Evaluation(s)
=============

The authors examine the expected profits of buying losers and selling winners
with equally-weighted indexes under various return-generating processes:

- The Independently and Identically Distributed Benchmark

  - Contrarian strategy reduces to shorting the higher and buying the lower mean
    return securities.
  - Expected profits are negative as long as there is some cross-sectional
    variation in expected returns.

- Stock Market Overreaction and Fads

  - The former necessarily implies the profitability of the portfolio strategy
    in the absence of cross-autocorrelation while the latter does do not.

- Trading on White Noise and Lead-Lag Relations

  - Each security can be individually unpredictable as long as the securities
    are positively cross-correlated at various leads and lags.

- Lead-lag effects and Nonsynchronous Trading

  - The prices of distinct securities are mistakenly assumed to be sampled
    simultaneously, which can induce autocorrelation and cross-autocorrelation.
  - Examining the magnitudes of index autocorrelation and cross-autocorrelations
    generated from thin trading models reveals that news affect more frequently
    traded stocks first and influences the returns of thinly traded securities
    with a lag.

- A Positively Dependent Common Factor, White Noise, and the
  Bid-Ask Spread Process

  - Empirical evidence invalidates this model as a plausible return-generating
    mechanism consistent with positive index autocorrelation and negative serial
    dependence in individual returns.

Analyzing the contrarian arbitrage portfolio, where the weights of securities
sum to zero, shows market overreaction as an optional enhancement to
profitability.  Since the experiments focus on the profits and do not account
for risks, this study can only assert that a contrarian strategy is a feasible
investment tool; the economic sources of positive cross-autocorrelations across
securities have not been identified.  Existing research still contests about the
profitability of contrarian long-horizon strategies that exploits lower
transaction costs.

Future Direction(s)
===================

- When are stock market fads profitable and with what strategy?

Question(s)
===========

- Have there been any contrarian strategies that utilizes long-horizon for
  short-horizon?
- What is the monthly returns of the simplified contrarian strategy?

Analysis
========

Less than fifty percent of the expected profits from a contrarian investment
rule may be attributed to overreaction; the majority of such profits are due to
cross effects among the securities in the form of lead-lag relations.  The paper
could have been even better had the authors presented the results in a more
intuitive fashion; reading a wall of text and figures that replace labels with
symbols is quite tiresome.  It is surprising that prior research automatically
assumed a causal relationship between market overreaction and contrarian profits
without any verification.  On a similar note, there should have been more
justifications behind the use of these specific return-generating processes.
Nonetheless, the derivations of the proposed model will be very useful when one
needs to reproduce the results.

.. rubric:: References

.. bibliography:: refs.bib
   :all:
