###############################################################################
Profitability of Momentum Strategies: An Evaluation of Alternative Explanations
###############################################################################

Motivation(s)
=============

Momentum strategies earn profits of about one percent per month for the
following year through buying stocks with high returns over the previous three
to twelve months and selling stocks with poor returns over the same time period.
Due to a lack of data, several theories have emerged in an attempt to explain
the source of the profits; they can categorized under

- Behavior Model: Market Inefficiency

  - Representative Heuristic

    - The tendency of individuals to identify an uncertain event, or a sample,
      by the degree to which it is similar to the parent population.
    - In the context of stocks, investors mistakenly conclude that firms
      realizing extraordinary earnings growths will continue to experience
      similar extraordinary growth in the future.
    - When coupled with conservatism bias, the idea that individuals underweight
      new information in updating their priors, this behavioral tendency can
      lead to long horizon negative returns despite previously high returns.

  - Self-attribution Bias

    - Overconfident investors push up the prices of the winners above their
      fundamental values.
    - The delayed overreaction in this model leads to momentum profits that are
      eventually reversed as prices revert to their fundamentals.

  - Partial Information

    - Informed investors (i.e. news watchers) obtain signals about future cash
      flows but ignore information in the past history of prices.
    - Technical traders extrapolate based on past prices without observing
      fundamental information and tend to push prices of past winners above
      their fundamental values.
    - The partial incorporation of information contributes to market
      underreaction resulting in momentum profits; return reversals occur when
      prices eventually revert to their fundamentals.

- Rational Model: Compensation for Risk / Product of Data Mining

  - Stock prices follow random walks with drifts, and the unconditional drifts
    vary across stocks.
  - The differences in unconditional drifts across stocks explain momentum
    profits.
  - Predicts that the stocks on the long side of the momentum portfolio should
    continue to outperform stocks on the short side by the same magnitude in any
    postranking period.

Proposed Solution(s)
====================

The authors propose evaluating the various explanations using out-of-sample
tests on the additional data collected over the past nine years.  The advantage
of an out-of-sample test is that it significantly reduces the number of
strategies that researchers can potentially search over, thus increasing the
informativeness of the tests.

Evaluation(s)
=============

The dataset consisted of all stocks traded on the NYSE, AMEX, and Nasdaq.
Stocks priced below $5 were excluded to ensure the results are not driven
primarily by small and illiquid stocks or by bid-ask bounce.  

Following Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), the stocks are ranked at the end of each
based on their past six-month returns and then grouped into 10 equally weighted
portfolios based on these ranks.  Each portfolio was held for six months
following the ranking month.

The monthly positive returns in the first twelve months following the formation
period over the 1965 to 1989 sample period confirms the results in
Jegadeesh and Titman (1993).  However, the January momentum profits are
significantly smaller than the momentum profits in other calendar months in all
sample periods.  Both winners and losers tend to be smaller firms than the
average stock in the sample because smaller firms have more volatile returns and
are thus more likely to be in the extreme return sorted portfolios.  The average
size rank for the winner portfolio is larger than that for the loser portfolio,
and the market betas for winners and losers are virtually equal.

More evidence in favor of behavioral theories can be found in the negative
cumulative return in the post-holding period (months thirteen to sixty).  The
evidence here indicates that the losers as well as winners experience negative
abnormal returns in years two through five; this contradicts the idea that the
momentum in loser returns is generated as a result of positive feedback trading
that is later reversed.  One can also rest assured that the momentum profits are
not entirely due to data snooping biases.

The analysis presented in this paper should be treated with caution because the
evidence of negative postholding period returns tends to depend on the
composition of the sample, the sample period, and whether the postholding period
returns are risk adjusted.  At best, the behavioral models provide a partial
explanation for the momentum profits.

Future Direction(s)
===================

- What are some good indicators to estimate the duration of a stock's momentum?
- How come index funds fail to achieve the proposed returns?
- Would including foreign stocks affect the returns?

Question(s)
===========

- This approach sounds like index funds?

Analysis
========

Momentum strategies have been shown to yield on average monthly returns of one
percent for the following year.  The source of the profits can be partially
explained through behavioral theories.  The analysis should have included
graphics alongside the tables since the focus is the trend.  Overall, it is good
to know that stocks are more consistent with behavior models than rational
models.

.. rubric:: References

.. bibliography:: refs.bib
   :all:
