###################################################################################
Do Asset Prices Reflect Fundamentals?  Freshly Squeezed Evidence from the OJ Market
###################################################################################

Motivation(s)
=============

In the seminal paper on frozen concentrate orange juice (FCOJ) future prices and
weather, the author identified that fundamentals (e.g. cash flows, expected
returns) have little explanatory power for asset returns.  Even though the
results lack any mention of market irrationality, the excess volatility
literature have subsequently adopted and frequently cited it in that context.

Recent behavioral finance research proposed an alternative explanation that the
relation between asset prices and fundamental information is incorrectly
measured or not measured at all.

Proposed Solution(s)
====================

The authors assert that existing literature has misinterpreted the data by
ignoring the state dependence inherent in the structural relation between FCOJ
returns and their underlying fundamentals.  Asset prices drift away from their
underlying fundamentals due to irrational agents who ignore these fundamentals.
The previously identified weather surprises should impact future returns only
around freezing temperatures.  Examining non-weather related news about
supply-side shocks provided further evidence for the proposed theory's
prediction power.

Evaluation(s)
=============

The data used in the experiments spanned from 1967 to 1998 and consisted of
temperature forecasts, USDA production forecasts conditioned on a non-freeze
season, resolution of production uncertainty, FCOJ futures returns, and
production from areas outside of Orlando specifically Brazil.

The empirical data revealed that the original FCOJ study incorrectly assigned
nonzero importance to months that can not trigger a crop freeze.  The linear
regression model it used cannot capture the nonlinearity of the weather: only a
surprise that causes a transition between the freezing and nonfreezing state
matters.  Moreover, the regression of asset returns on forecast errors
implicitly assumes that a zero forecast error should have no effect. In contrast
to the original study's conclusion, the FCOJ futures return variability and
direction seems to coincide more with the author's proposed piecewise linear
model.

Since the goal is to demonstrate that relevant information about fundamentals
affect asset prices, the authors chose to ignore return-relevant information.
However, to build the correct structural model with all the relevant
interactions and accurately measure the fundamentals is a difficult task.

Future Direction(s)
===================

- What pieces of information returned by unsupervised learning can count as
  fundamental?
- How can counterfactual simulations be used to identify fundamental
  information?

Question(s)
===========

- What percentage of finance papers blindly accept results like FCOJ?

Analysis
========

Fundamental information do have a strong predictable influence on asset
returns assuming the model represents the relationships accurately enough.  When
encountering any interpretation of data, always question the methodology that
led to the conclusion.  The paper could have been summarized more succinctly
while still maintaining a strong argument.  It is surprising that the excess
volatility literature would simply cite a result without questioning its
applicability.  The data in the appendix is very useful as labeled data for
future exploration of identifying fundamental information.

.. rubric:: References

.. bibliography:: refs.bib
   :all:
