################################################################################
A Simple Implicit Measure of the Effective Bid-Ask Spread in an Efficient Market
################################################################################

Motivation(s)
=============

In an informationally efficient market with zero trading costs, the observed
market price contains all the relevant information.  A price change will only
occur if and only if unanticipated information is received by market
participants.

In the current market, transaction costs have a strong influence on the net
gains to investments and market equilibrium returns.  The most accurate measure
of trading costs is the monthly statement of an account.  The alternative
measures are subject to considerable error because of hard-to-quantify factors
such as commissions, transaction size, and discounts.  This issue worsens when
the desired measurement is the bid-ask spread, a small region of price which
brackets the underlying value of the asset.

The bid-ask spread is often of interest because it is part of the compensation
package for the market maker.  Furthermore, empirical studies have shown that
negative serial dependence in observed price changes should be anticipated when
a market maker is involved in transactions.

Proposed Solution(s)
====================

The author uses the first-order serial covariance of price changes to infer the
effective bid-ask spread.  The implicit percentage spread is given by

.. math::

   s_j = 200 \sqrt{-\mathrm{Cov}_j}

where :math:`s_j` is the spread and :math:`\mathrm{Cov}_j` is the serial
covariance of returns for asset :math:`j`.

This method assumes

- The asset is traded in an informationally efficient market.
- The probability distribution of observed price changes is stationary (at
  least for short monthly intervals).

If the markets are efficient, the covariance between successive price changes
cannot be due to news, whereas the variance of observed price changes is likely
to be dominated by news.

Evaluation(s)
=============

The author proved that under an efficient market:

- the covariance between successive price changes cannot be due to new
  information,
- the implicit spread measure is independent of the observation interval, and
- even if the spread changes in reaction to news, the serial covariance will
  still be :math:`\frac{-s^2}{4}` where :math:`s^2` is the average squared
  spread in the sample.

The author estimated the annual trading costs from daily and weekly returns of
stocks listed on the New York and American Exchanges.  The results were
validated indirectly by relating the measured implicit spread to firm size.
Since firm size is positively related to volume, and volume is negatively
related to spread, there should exist a strong negative cross-sectional relation
between measured spread and measured size.

The resulting estimates indicate a strong negative relation to firm size.
However, a statistically significant difference was detected between spreads
estimated from daily and weekly data, which implies informational inefficiency
or very short-term nonstationarity in expected returns.

Future Direction(s)
===================

- In the current era where social media is everywhere, how to determine if the
  market informationally efficient?

Question(s)
===========

- Has there been any cases where the market maker abused their information to
  trade?

Analysis
========

In an efficient market, one can impose simplifying assumptions to derive a
closed form measure using empirical estimates.  One such example is the bid-ask:
it is proven and shown empirically to be closely related to firm size.

Unfortunately, it is not obvious to what extent those assumptions hold for the
real market.  The author did not validate the results using real bid-ask spread
data, so the method's accuracy is questionable.  Nonetheless, the theoretical
insights of the proposal model is quite interesting and warrant further
:doc:`investigations </blog/2016/10/04/the-adaptive-markets-hypothesis-market-efficiency-from-an-evolutionary-perspective>`.

.. rubric:: References

.. bibliography:: refs.bib
   :all:
